NCAA Prediction Article- Summary
================
Nick Zirkle

      Usually, prediction contests on Kaggle (dating all the way back to
2010) were based on using a practice set of data to predict omitted
variables in a nearly identical set of test data. However, with the
introduction of the 2014 NCAA men’s basketball tournament competition,
this concept of a prediction contest changed. While previous
competitions had to withhold code from participants before the test, the
purpose of this contest was to predict the future; specifically, the
2014 “March Madness” men’s basketball tournament. There were already
plenty of NCAA bracket competitions online with extensive cash prizes,
but Kaggle was interested in seeing how data-minded individuals
approached correctly predicting team performance.

      Contestants were provided with all types of previous data,
including competition history, conference play, strength of schedule,
and overall record to predict the win probability for all potential
pairwise matchups of teams in that year’s tournament. Submissions were
allowed to be sent in after “Selection Sunday”, when all 68
participating teams were selected, but before the first round of
tournament games started (not including play-in games).

      But this was no easy feat, since predicting the outcome of 63
college basketball games was a tough feat, even with all of the previous
data given. Furthermore, Kaggle judged participants based on a score
that described predictive discrepancy between games, meaning that one or
two major outliers of results could ruin a participant’s prediction.
Even so, 243 contestants/teams of contestants submitted a combined 428
predictions.

      And the results were a success, with 8 different contestants
predicting at least 46 out of the 63 games correctly (approximately a
73% success rate). And when compared to expert predictions from sports
media and corporations, all 60 predictions studied had a lower success
rate than these 8 contestants, further showing the power of data and
analytics in the field of sports prediction.
